Cookbook crystal preferred orientation calculation for olivine based on Fraters and Billen 2021 (#5931)
geodynamics/aspect: cookbooks/crystal_preferred_orientation_olivine_fraters_billen_2021/doc/crystal_preferred_orientation_olivine_fraters_billen_2021.md

# Olivine Fabric Developments Under Simple Shear

> *This section was contributed by Xiaochuan Tian, with helps from Yijun Wang and Menno Fraters. It is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*This section was contributed by Xiaochuan Tian, with help from Yijun Wang and Menno Fraters. It is
```

based on a section in {cite:t}`fraters_billen_2021_cpo`
by Menno Fraters and Magali Billen published in 2021.*

This cookbook explains how to set up a numerical experiment for fabric
developments of a single olivine particle under simple shear macroscopic strain.
It uses ASPECT's
crystal preferred orientation (CPO) implementation, which is described in detail in
{cite:t}`fraters_billen_2021_cpo`.
The fabric calculation is based on DRex {cite:t}`kaminski2004`.

> This cookbook describes how to use ASPECT CPO implementation to calculate the major

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This cookbook describes how to use ASPECT's CPO implementation to calculate the major
```

# Olivine Fabric Developments Under Simple Shear

*This section was contributed by Xiaochuan Tian, with helps from Yijun Wang and Menno Fraters. It is
based on a section in {cite:t}`fraters_billen_2021_cpo`
by Menno Fraters and Magali Billen published in 2021.*

This cookbook explains how to set up a numerical experiment for fabric
developments of a single olivine particle under simple shear macroscopic strain.
It uses ASPECT's
crystal preferred orientation (CPO) implementation, which is described in detail in
{cite:t}`fraters_billen_2021_cpo`.
The fabric calculation is based on DRex {cite:t}`kaminski2004`.

> This cookbook describe how to use ASPECT CPO implementation to calculate the major

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This cookbook describes how to use ASPECT CPO implementation to calculate the major
```

olivine fabrics observed in the lab experiments. It focuses on reproducing Fig. 3
of {cite}`fraters_billen_2021_cpo`.

## Motivation
The Earth's plates can move relative to each other because the underlying mantle
can be deformed to accommodate such motions.

> This motion reflects dynamics inside the planet but cannot be observed directly, as the depth of interest is beyond human drilling capability. However, indirect observations from seismic anisotropy provide information about the directionality of seismic wave speeds propagating inside the Earth. If such directionality is controlled by the mantle’s motion or deformation, we can use seismic anisotropy observations to infer mantle deformation.

Reviewer: Currently it sounds like you say the plate motion cannot be observed directly, which is not correct. You probably mean the dynamics that cannot be observed. Maybe change to:
```suggestion
This motion reflects dynamics inside the planet, which cannot be observed directly, as the depth of interest is beyond human drilling capability. However, indirect observations from seismic anisotropy provide information about the directionality of seismic wave speeds propagating inside the Earth. If such directionality is controlled by the mantle’s motion or deformation, we can use seismic anisotropy observations to infer mantle deformation.
```

> It’s important to note that this cookbook does not directly compare model outputs with seismic anisotropy observations. Instead, it provides the full elastic tensor, including its symmetry axes and fast directions, at the locations of particles in the model. To make direct comparisons with seismic observations, you would still need to process these results through a separate code that simulates seismic wave propagation through the modeled medium.

Author: I also have clarified this point toward the end of Motivation section:   "Note that the effects of secondary phases, such as enstatite {cite:t}kaminski2004 can also be included in the method, we here only focus on olivine for simplicity and the input file also include example of enstatite calculation setup."

> It’s important to note that this cookbook does not directly compare model outputs with seismic anisotropy observations. Instead, it provides the full elastic tensor, including its symmetry axes and fast directions, at the locations of particles in the model. To make direct comparisons with seismic observations, you would still need to process these results through a separate code that simulates seismic wave propagation through the modeled medium.

Reviewer 2: Oke, sorry. I lost sight that this cookbook is a reproduction of a setup in a paper, and in my mind it was more a tutorial. I think it is fine to on the olivine in this cookbook. We can always have other cookbooks which focus on the other elastisity and enstatite, or add that later to this cookbook if we think that would be relevant for this cookbook.

> It’s important to note that this cookbook does not directly compare model outputs with seismic anisotropy observations. Instead, it provides the full elastic tensor, including its symmetry axes and fast directions, at the locations of particles in the model. To make direct comparisons with seismic observations, you would still need to process these results through a separate code that simulates seismic wave propagation through the modeled medium.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is important to note that this cookbook does not directly compare model outputs with seismic anisotropy observations. Instead, it provides the full elastic tensor, including its symmetry axes and fast directions, at the locations of particles in the model. To make direct comparisons with seismic observations, you would still need to process these results through a separate code that simulates seismic wave propagation through the modeled medium.
```

Olivine is a major mineral of the Earth's upper mantle where continuous deformation
takes place. People care about olivine fabric developments under simple shear as it may

> provide a bridge that links seismic anisotropy observations to the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
provide a bridge that links seismic anisotropy observations to
```

> flows in the upper mantle that accommodate plate motions. Indeed, high temperature and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
flow in the upper mantle that accommodates plate motions. Indeed, high temperature and
```

> pressure lab experiments using Griggs apparatus to investigate olivine fabrics developments

Reviewer 2: I am not sure everyone knows what a Griggs apparatus is, I think a link to the wiki page might be helpful.

```suggestion
pressure lab experiments using [Griggs apparatus](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Griggs_apparatus) to investigate olivine fabrics developments
```

under simple shear do find systematic types of fabrics based on the stress and water content conditions

> (see {cite:t}`karato2008` for details). Note that the effects of secondary phases, such as enstatite  {cite:t}`kaminski2004` can also be included in the method, we here only focus on olivine for simplicity and the input file also include example of enstatite calculation setup.

Reviewer: This sentence seems to contradict itself. First you say we only focus on olivine, then you say the input file also includes enstatite. Which of the two is it?

## Model setup

Following {cite:t}`fraters_billen_2021_cpo`, we prescribe simple shear in a 3d Cartesian box/cube

> with dimensions of $1 \times 1 \times 1 $ $[m^3]$. The shear strain rate

Reviewer: ```suggestion
with dimensions of $1 \times 1 \times 1 $ $[m^3]$. The shear strain rate is set to
```

> $\dot{\epsilon}_{xz} = -5\times 10^{-6} [s^{-1}]$. The olivine/enstatite particle is placed

Reviewer: Olivine or enstatite? Which one is it?

right at the center of the cubic box so it stays stationary. The DRex implementation
keep tracks of rotations of crystal grains within the particle under macroscopic deformation.

```{figure-md} fig:model_setup_3D_box
<img src="model_setup_3D_box.png" style="width:80.0%" />

3D shear box with velocity vectors. The grey ball is the central olivine particle.
```

> The model shows how crystal grains rotate and align under simple shear with pole figures.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The model computes how crystal grains rotate and align under simple shear, the pole figures visualize this rotation.
```

## The input file

> Instead of solving Stokes equation with initial and boundary conditions, we instead prescribe

Reviewer: The Stokes equation doesnt have an initial condition.
```suggestion
Instead of solving the Stokes equation with boundary conditions, we instead prescribe
```

> a constant simple shear strain rate field by setting Nonlinear solver scheme to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a constant simple shear strain rate field by setting "Nonlinear solver scheme" to
```

"single Advection, no Stokes" and

> prescribing the Stokes solution with a function. In this case, what we only care is the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
prescribing the Stokes solution with a function. In this case, the only model property that we care about is the
```

Reviewer: [this comment](https://github.com/geodynamics/aspect/pull/5931/files#r2143690022) has not been addressed yet.

> prescribed strain rate that is exerted onto the olivine particle. Parameters useful for the Stokes
> equation is not important in this case.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
prescribed strain rate that is exerted onto the olivine particle. Therefore we can neglect parameters that control the solution of the Stokes equation.
```

```{literalinclude} prescribe_stokes.part.prm
```

> The second part of the input file specify what to output and what minerals to keep track of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The second part of the input file specifies what to output and for what minerals to keep track of
```

CPO development. It also specifies the parameters for the DRex algorithm.

```{literalinclude} cpo.part.prm
```

The complete input file is located at
[/cookbooks/crystal_preferred_orientation_olivine_fraters_billen_2021/olivineA.prm](../olivineA.prm).

> ## Plotting pole figure

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Plotting pole figures
```

> To plot pole figures from the output in out_drex_olivineA/particles_cpo, you could use [MTEX](https://mtex-toolbox.github.io/) or [cpo_analyzer](https://github.com/MFraters/cpo_analyzer.git). Inside the git clone cpo_analyzer folder, run:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To plot pole figures from the output in `out_drex_olivineA/particles_cpo`, you could use [MTEX](https://mtex-toolbox.github.io/) or [cpo_analyzer](https://github.com/MFraters/cpo_analyzer.git). For example inside the `cpo_analyzer` folder, run:
```

```{code-block} console
$ cargo run --release path/to/cpo_pole_figure_config.toml
```

> Example cpo_pole_figure_config.toml is included in the same folder as the example input file. Folder CPO_figures will be generated in the folder out_drex_olivineA that contains the pole figures.

Reviewer 2: can you link to this `[/cookbooks/.../cpo_pole_config.toml](/cookbooks/.../cpo_pole_config.toml)`

Author: done

> A folder named 'CPO_figures' will be generated in the folder 'out_drex_olivineA' that contains the pole figure results.  -> An example config file can be found here: [/cookbooks/crystal_preferred_orientation_olivine_fraters_billen_2021/cpo_pole_figure_config.toml](./cpo_pole_figure_config.toml).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A folder named 'CPO_figures' will be generated in the folder 'out_drex_olivineA' that contains the pole figure results.  An example config file can be found here: [/cookbooks/crystal_preferred_orientation_olivine_fraters_billen_2021/cpo_pole_figure_config.toml](./cpo_pole_figure_config.toml).
```

## Model results
```{figure-md} fig:initCPO
<img src="initial_random_cpo.png" style="width:50.0%" />

Initial randomized CPO at time zero.
```
By changing "Olivine: A-fabric" to "Olivine: B-fabric" you can generate olivine fabric results for B-type and other types as well shown below.

```{figure-md} fig:olivinefabrics
<img src="Olivine_fabrics.svg" style="width:60.0%" />

Olivine A-E type fabrics under simple shear with a shear strain of 1.5
at 3e5 seconds of model time under constant shear strain rate:
 $\dot{\epsilon}_{xz} = -5\times 10^{-6} [s^{-1}]$.
Note that the color scales range from 0 to 5 but actual results may be larger.
```

When we look at the visualization output of this model (see also

> {numref}`fig:olivinefabrics`), we can see the results reproduce the pole figures in Figure 3 of {cite:t}`fraters_billen_2021_cpo`. There is minor difference (the girdle is less pronounced) in type D fabric when compared to Fig. 3 of (Karato et al., 2008), which requires further investigation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{numref}`fig:olivinefabrics`), we can see the results reproduce the pole figures in Figure 3 of {cite:t}`fraters_billen_2021_cpo`. There is a minor difference in type D fabric (the girdle is less pronounced) when compared to Fig. 3 of (Karato et al., 2008), which could be investigated in more details in the future.
```

## Extending the model

> This simple 1 $m^{3}$ cube simple shear model for tracking olivine fabric development using

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This model of a unit cube under simple shear can be extended in various ways.
```

the crystal preferred orientation implementation can be extended for various settings.

> Some ideas for adapting the model setup:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some ideas for adapting the model setup are:
```

-   Setup high pressure and temperature lab experiments for olivine CPO.
    After benchmarking against the lab experiment results, it could then be

>     extended beyond parameter space limited by lab experiment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    extended beyond the parameter space limited by the lab experiment.
```

> -   Add CPO calculations in large scale geodynamic models like mantle plume,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   Add CPO calculations in large scale geodynamic models like mantle plumes,
```

# Olivine Fabric Developments Under Simple Shear

*This section was contributed by Xiaochuan Tian, with helps from Yijun Wang and Menno Fraters. It is
based on a section in {cite:t}`fraters_billen_2021_cpo`
by Menno Fraters and Magali Billen published in 2021.*

This cookbook explains how to set up a numerical experiment for fabric
developments of a single olivine particle under simple shear macroscopic strain.
It uses ASPECT's
crystal preferred orientation (CPO) implementation, which is described in detail in
{cite:t}`fraters_billen_2021_cpo` and the paper is open accessed at

> [here](https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1029/2021GC009846).

Reviewer 2: The paper is open access in general, so people can just follow the doi in the reference. I don't think there needs to be a separate link here.

> The fabric calculation is based on DRex (Kaminski et al., 2004) at

Reviewer 2: please use the {cite:t} for this paper, so that is actually links

Author: added

[here](https://academic.oup.com/gji/article/158/2/744/2013756).
This notebook describe how to use ASPECT CPO implementation to calculate the major
olivine fabrics observed in the lab experiments. It focuses on reproducing Fig. 3
of {cite}`fraters_billen_2021_cpo`.

## Motivation
The Earth's plates can move relative to each other because the underlying mantle

> can flow/(be deformed) to accommodate such motions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
can be deformed to accommodate such motions.
```

This flowing motion reflects dynamics inside the planet but cannot be observed directly
as the depth of interest is beyond human's drilling ability. However, indirect observation
from seismic anisotropy provides information about directionality of the speed of seismic
waves that propagate inside the Earth. If such directionality is controlled by
the mantle's motion/deformation, we can then use seismic anisotropy observations

> to infer mantle's deformation.

Author: revised.

(see Karato et al., 2008 for details). Here is a
[link](https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.earth.36.031207.124120) to the paper.

## Model setup

Following {cite:t}`fraters_billen_2021_cpo`, we prescribe simple shear in a 3d Cartesian box/cube
with dimensions of $1 \times 1 \times 1 $ $[m^3]$. The shear strain rate
$\dot{\epsilon}_{xz} = -5\times 10^{-6} [s^{-1}]$. The olivine particle is placed
right at the center of the cubic box so it stays stationary. The DRex implementation
keep tracks of rotations of crystal grains within the particle under macroscopic deformation.

```{figure-md} fig:model_setup_3D_box
<img src="model_setup_3D_box.png" style="width:80.0%" />

3D shear box with velocity vectors. The grey ball is the central olivine particle.
```

The model shows how crystal grains rotate and align under simple shear with pole figures.

## The input file

:::{tip}
To convert input file format from ASPECT v2.+ to v3.+, update the input file with update_prm_files.sh inside
/aspect/contrib/utilities if the model doesn't run.
See Pull Request #5873
[conversations](https://github.com/geodynamics/aspect/pull/5873#issuecomment-2167145176) for detail.

> :::

Author: updated input filel with V3 compatible
